Parenting is hard work. Keeping your children safe, helping them stay out of trouble, and building good character and habits require constant effort. But as all parents (and anyone who once was a kid) know, parenting can involve disciplining your kid when they misbehave. Parental discipline can take many forms. It can involve a stern talking-to, taking away phones or other electronic devices that are so important to modern kids, or grounding them. For some parents, discipline may also involve spanking their child. Given Florida’s strong laws against child abuse and domestic violence (which covers violence against any family member, not just spouses or significant others), can you be charged with a crime for spanking your child in Florida?

Spanking or other discipline of a child that involves a physical act is known as “corporal punishment” or “corporal discipline.” Florida law allows parents or legal guardians to use corporal punishment on their children – to a point. Florida Statutes Section 39.01(2), which defines child abuse, provides that

“Corporal discipline of a child by a parent or legal custodian for disciplinary purposes does not in itself constitute abuse when it does not result in harm to the child.”

So, while spanking is not in and of itself against the law in Florida, it can be a crime if it causes “harm” to the child as defined in Florida law. What constitutes “harm” goes beyond actual physical harm to include acts likely to cause physical, mental, or emotional harm – even if no actual harm results.

As set forth in In Florida Statutes Section 39.01(32)(a), “harm” to a child’s health or welfare can occur when any person “inflicts or allows to be inflicted upon the child physical, mental, or emotional injury…” Such injury specifically includes:

“Inappropriate or excessively harsh disciplinary action that is likely to result in physical injury, mental injury as defined in this section, or emotional injury.”

Note that even if the parent did not intend to cause the child injury, if the discipline was “likely to result” in injury, that would be beyond the scope of allowable corporal discipline and could expose the parent to criminal charges.

Under Florida law, whether an injury is significant enough to warrant charges will be evaluated in light of a number of factors, including:

Corporal discipline may be considered excessive or abusive when it results in any of the following or other similar injuries:

As a Florida parent, you have the right to discipline your kids. That discipline can include spanking. But when you go beyond a slap or two across the bottom, you may find yourself facing child abuse charges. If you have further questions about the allowable extent of parental corporate punishment in Florida, contact an experienced Florida criminal defense attorney.

For over 28 years, Miami criminal defense attorney Albert M. Quirantes has been aggressively and zealously defending the rights of those accused of felony and misdemeanor crimesthroughout South Florida. With his dedicated team, reasonable legal fees, and a well-earned reputation for challenging prosecutors at every turn, he has protected over 8,000 clients during some of the roughest times of their lives.

Increase your knowledge! If you want to know more about how to resolve the problems you face when charged with a criminal offense in Florida, then you can follow Miami Criminal Attorney Albert M. Quirantes on Facebook, Twitter, or Google+.

If you have been arrested and charged with a crime, please call us today at (305) 644-1800 or fill out our online form to arrange for your free, confidential initial consultation.

If you have any questions about this or any other criminal accusation, call Miami Criminal Defense Lawyer Albert Quirantes at: (305) 644-1800 or visit our homepage www.CriminalDefendant.com for a direct link to the office or a text message or a map and directions to our office.