An apple is a crunchy, bright-colored fruit, which is one of the most popular in the U.S. You've probably heard the age-old saying, "An apple a day keeps the doctor away." Although eating them isn't a cure-all, it is good for your health.

European settlers brought apples with them to the Americas. They preferred apples to North America's native crab apple, a smaller, tarter fruit.

Today, many types of apples are grown in the U.S., but a small percentage of the ones you can buy in grocery stores are imported. Each type has a different shape, color, and texture.

An apple can be sweet or sour, and its flavor can vary depending on what type you're eating.

Apples can do a lot for you, thanks to plant chemicals called flavonoids. And they have pectin , a fiber that breaks down in your gut. If you take off the apple's skin before eating it, you won't get as much of the fiber or flavonoids.

Nutritionists and other scientists get excited about apples because of their phytochemical content . Phytochemicals are substances found in plants that may be good for human health. They go by many different names, such as phytonutrients , polyphenols, antioxidants , phytochemicals, and flavonoids. You shouldn't peel your apples, as most of the phytochemicals are in the skin .

The fiber can slow digestion, so you feel fuller after eating. This can keep you from overeating. Eating fiber-rich foods helps control symptoms and lessens the effects of acid reflux . An apple's fiber can also help with diarrhea and constipation.

Some studies show that plant chemicals and the fiber of an apple peel protect against blood vessel and heart damage. They also can help lower your cholesterol , and they might protect your cells' DNA from something called oxidative damage, which is one of the things that can lead to cancer .

Research shows the antioxidants in apples can slow the growth of cancer cells. And they can protect the cells in your pancreas, which can lower your chances of type 2 diabetes.

You don't need to be concerned about the sugar in apples. Although they have carbs that affect your blood sugar , these carbs are different from other sugars that strip away fiber that's good for you.

Apples are low in sodium, fat, and cholesterol. They don't offer protein, but apples are a good source of vitamin C and fiber.

One medium apple with the skin has around 4 grams of fiber, while one without the skin has around 2 grams.

Although apples do have health benefits, eating too many of them (like anything) can be bad for you. Too much fruit can cause you to gain weight.

Pesticides. Apples are one of the fruits that have high pesticide residues because bugs and disease are more likely to affect them. It's always best to wash fruits like apples before you eat them.

Seeds. You might've also heard that eating apple seeds or the core is bad for you. The seeds do have chemicals that turn into cyanide in your body, but you would have to crush and eat many seeds for them to harm you. In fact, an average adult would have to eat at least 150 crushed seeds for a risk of cyanide poisoning. The seeds are actually rich in protein and fiber.

Interactions. Apple juice can interact with the allergy drug fexofenadine (Allegra). The juice makes it hard for your body to absorb the medicine.

When you're buying apples, make sure they feel firm and heavy. The skin shouldn't have bruises, cuts, or soft spots.

Apples are healthiest when eaten fresh and unpeeled. Cut apples turn brown quickly because of a process called enzymatic browning. The darkened fruit isn't harmful, but it may look less appealing. To prevent enzymatic browning, dip the apples in a lemon juice solution or use a commercial product.

Make sure to store apples in your refrigerator to keep them fresh longer. They can be stored at room temperature, but they'll ripen much faster.

When you eat an apple, leave the skin on because it has more than half of the apple's fiber.

The types of apples that are best for baking are usually tart and slightly sweet varieties, including:

Some types of apple store well, while others are better if eaten quickly.Â The ideal storage temperature for apples is 30-32 F with 90%-95% relative humidity. Under these storage conditions, apples can last for many weeks to months, depending on the type:

There are several things you can do in order to extend the shelf life of your apples:

Most apples will last 4-6 weeks in the fridge. Once cut, they will brown more quickly and won't last as long. Some apples can last longer in the fridge than others.

Apples are a popular fruit with many types such as Red Delicious, McIntosh, and Granny Smith, each offering different flavors and textures. Apples are touted for their health benefits, containing plant chemicals like flavonoids and fiber, which can aid digestion, control symptoms of acid reflux, and promote heart health. Antioxidants in apples may slow cancer cell growth, protect against type 2 diabetes , and support lung, heart, and immune system health.Â