Elon Gold is an American stand-up comedian, actor, writer, producer and podcaster.

Elon Gold was born to Lynn and Sidney Gold. He was raised in the Pelham Parkway section of The Bronx in New York . His older brother Steven is involved in the music production industry. He had a younger brother Ari , a rhythm and blues singer. Ari died of leukemia in 2021, at the age of 47. He attended the Westchester Day School in Mamaroneck, New York and the Marsha Stern Talmudical Academy in Manhattan .

Gold first starred in the television series Stacked . He also starred in the short-lived sitcom In-Laws . Best known for his impressions, including those of Jeff Goldblum , Howard Stern and Jay Leno , Gold was a judge on The Next Best Thing , a celebrity impersonation competition series on ABC . He appeared in the movie Cheaper by the Dozen (2003) as a cameraman from The Oprah Winfrey Show and had a recurring role in the short-lived ABC prime-time show, The Dana Carvey Show in 1996.

Gold often writes with his long-time friend and writing partner Ari Schiffer. The two have written multiple pilots together, including one that sold to Touchstone Television . Touchstone purchased the script, Wifeless , about two straight best friends who get married . He has appeared in several television shows, such as The Mentalist (2009) and Frasier (2004). He also had a recurring role as the head of Hulu in Curb Your Enthusiasm in 2021.

His 2014 comedy special, Chosen and Taken , appeared on Netflix . Gold appeared as himself in Season 3 of the Home Box Office series Crashing , first broadcast in 2019.

In 2024 he began filming the Israeli film, The Badchan alongside Shuli Rand . Gold plays a Yiddish-speaking badchan who is hired by Rand's character. He also plays journalist Harvey Levin , alongside Abbie Cornish in the upcoming film, Trust Me, I'm a Doctor , based on the former doctor of late reality star, Anna Nicole Smith .

He is an observant Jew . On Friday, August 22, 2014, he was a victim of an antisemitic incident whilst walking home from one Shabbat dinner in Los Angeles , California . He wrote an op ed about it in The Jewish Journal of Greater Los Angeles a few days later.