For nearly the entire history of film production , certain films have been banned by film censorship or review organizations for political or moral reasons or for controversial content, such as racism , copyright violation , and underage immorality . Censorship standards vary widely by country, and can vary within an individual country over time due to political or moral change.

Many countries have government-appointed or private commissions to censor and rate productions for film and television exhibition. While it is common for films to be edited to fall into certain rating classifications, this list includes only films that have been explicitly prohibited from public screening. In some countries, films are banned on a wide scale; these are not listed in this table.

As a result of the decision the film was also withdrawn from cinemas in Belarus, Ukraine, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan, while release of the film has been postponed until October in Georgia . Ukrainian film director and producer Alexander Rodnyansky criticised the decision not to release Child 44 as bad for the country's film industry. "Before, films where Soviet and Russian heroes were presented not in the best way have been released in Russia, but nothing similar happened. Now everything to do with history should clearly fit into a kind of framework set by the culture ministry."

There have, however, been some exemptions. North Korean leader Kim Jong Il reportedly owned a collection of around 15,000 films, many of which were from overseas. According to Nick Romano of Vanity Fair , during Kim Il Sung 's reign of North Korea, "[Kim Jong Il] even established an underground circuit of bootleg films, as North Koreans weren’t allowed to watch most international releases". The British film Bend It Like Beckham was broadcast on North Korean state television on 26 December 2010, to celebrate foreign relations between the two nations; the film contains significant sub-plots about religion and homosexuality, but was edited down to half its original runtime for the broadcast. In 2015, the British Film Institute reported that 108 films from outside of North Korea had been screened at that year's Pyongyang International Film Festival , but none were from South Korea, Japan, or the United States.

Generally speaking, the government itself cannot ban a film, since the United States Supreme Court ruled that films are protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution in a landmark 1950s decision. Instead of formal government censorship or bans, the film industry has, largely, policed itself through content-based ratings that are awarded to the vast majority of films that are to be publicly exhibited. Sometimes, a filmmaker may make edits to a film to avoid an 'R-rating' or an 'NC-17' rating, but a modern-day, government ban on a film would likely be struck down by the courts.